robotics program came out of our productivity
program. The industrial engineering department
is now involved in an Air Force effort to set up an
artificial intelligence program. And a lot of the
advanced manufacturing system work that is
currently being done by Dr. Don Phillips and
others in industrial engineering had its roots in
the Park Community. And so, although it does not
exist as such now, it laid the foundation for some
activities that are currently going on. And
incidentally, here again, the only reason that
that thing succeeded was that Mr. Benson and Mr.
Whitmore gave me a chunk of T's money with which to
promote it. And that's the only thing we did. And if
I can tell you just a quick story about that time.
Dr. Ray Goforth, who at that time was in industrial
engineering, but now is in industrial
engineering, is in mechanical engineering. And
is a very competent guy. One summer, using T's
money, we pursued this problem of why weren't
numerically controlled machines showing up,
particularly in what we call the mom-and-pop
machine shops, the little job shops that, again,
dot the back alleys
of Houston and Dallas and other large cities. And
don't misunderstand, they're not always just
real small operations. Some of those things are
really small. And so with T's money, we did a study
of barriers to the utilization of numerically
controlled machines in small shops. It turned out
to have been a mere classic. And gave us
credibility that led to research activities,
research sponsorships. And this is, again, you
see, the thing that you have to do. You can't take an
outfit that has no track record in a given area and
go to a sponsor and say, here, give me some money to
do some work in that area. He's going to say, well,
what the hell have you done? And quite improperly
so. And if you say, well, nothing, but if you give us
some money, we're going to do something great.
That ain't going to get it. And so we, the money that
we got from the National Science Foundation came
out of a, really came out of that little study that
Ray Goforth did for us back in the summer of 77, I
think, or 76, I can't remember.
And it led to an exchange that I had with a guy from
the National Science Foundation because they had
a productivity program at that time. And the
interesting thing that came out of our study was
that the reason people weren't using these
advanced manufacturing systems was because they
were afraid of them. They didn't understand. They
didn't understand what these devices could do for
them, and they were afraid of what they might do to
them. And Ray's work that summer, and he had a
couple of students working on it, I thought was
magnificent. And it brought that forth very
clearly. As it so happened, I went to a meeting
sponsored by the National Science Foundation
dealing with productivity matters, and they got
into this very issue. Their view, traditional
Bank of the Potomac's myopia, was that it all
rested on money. If these people just had money,
they would go buy these machines and use them and so
forth. But hell, it was obvious that that the
people in Houston, I mean, most of them tied to the
petrochemical industry, making machine parts
for them, they were laughing all the way at the
bank. I mean, money was anything but a problem. And
so, as a matter of fact, in this public meeting up in
Rochester, New York, I got into another heated
discussion with this guy from the National
Science Center, who was a friend, was and is a
friend. So I told him, we've got data to dispute
that. And so he said, I want to see that. And so he did
see it, and that led to a lot of things.
We eventually got involved in the Air Force's ICAM
program, the Integrated Manufacturing Program,
largely because they were concerned about
technology transfer.
Because of this little rigging study that we had
done, we're sort of nationally recognized
experts on technology transfer. But it's just an
indication, again, of the power of just a little
bit of tea's winning. And again, if it hadn't been
there, we wouldn't have done it. Let's go back to
the flight land in 1964. Oh, okay. Before we move on
farther. Yeah, okay, back to the 60s then.
Well, of course I had naturally, when I came here in
64, having been involved in hypersonic and
reentry research associated with the space
program at that time, And I don't think, you know,
at that time we couldn't foresee that as soon as the
Apollo program had been successful that
everything was going to go downhill. We just, you
know, we thought that investing in space-type
research was a heck of a good thing to do. So I was
obviously interested in promoting that when I
came down here.
And I was primarily an experimentalist. I hadn't
done a lot of theoretical work. It was mostly
wind tone work and making those experiments. Of
course, we didn't have a hypersonic facility
here. And so it seemed as though that the most
inexpensive facility that we could develop was a
shock tube, which is a device that will create
hypersonic flows for very, very short periods of
time. And basically, you have this large tube, and
you create a very high pressure shock wave that
rushes down the tube and pulls the air
behind it, with it, at very high speeds. And so you
can do some good... Back in those days, of course,
the work that needed to be done was very, very basic
work.
Because aerodynamics was in a completely new
realm. Normally, of course, air is nitrogen and
oxygen. N2 and O2, both diatomic molecules,
principally. Well, those molecules, in addition
to bouncing off one another like billiard balls,
the individual atoms in the molecule vibrate.
There is an intermolecular bond based on largely
the electronic attraction that holds them
together. But when you talk about a reentry
theory, coming, whistling back into the
atmosphere at very, very high speeds. It has a
shockwave event. There's a temperature jump
across that shockwave. There's a temperature
jump across any shockwave, even though it might
be, you know, if you have a Mach 2 fighter, or a
Concorde, you know, anything. But when you talk
about Mach 2 or Mach 20, The temperature joke is so
great that it causes those molecules, those
atoms, to cause the molecules to dissociate. And
so you have a chemical reaction. The M2 becomes 2N.
The same thing for oxygen. So this air, or this gas
behind this shock wave, is no longer air. It's some
weird new gas. And the fact that that structure has
changed makes it, made it very difficult to
predict the lift and drag of things like the
Mercury capsule. If you recall the early Mercury
flights, some of them, there was one, who flew
that? I can't remember. I think it was the third
flight. The guy landed miles from the touchdown
point. And the principal reason there was Of
course, he was flying at somewhat the wrong angle
of attack coming back in. But nonetheless, our
inability to predict lift and drag was very great.
largely because we just didn't understand this
strange new and then the ionization blackout, you
know, where even though the temperatures were so
high that the electrons would peel off of these
atoms and create this sheath of ions behind it, and
the radio wave wouldn't penetrate it. So we had
that ionization blackout period going on. And so
all of that stuff at that time was, God, that was
just, that was way out stuff. And so shock tubes
could create shock waves strong enough to cause
those chemical reactions. And so we could study
them. And so, again, good old teams and good old
Harry Whitmore gave me,
I can't remember, I think it was $40,000 or
$50,000, I think, to build a shock tube. And we did.
And again,
that was the foundation for some research work,
and which, again, simply would not have happened
had we not gotten that money for TEEs. Well, so the
shock tube lab, and we had a building given to us out
at the annex. It wasn't much of a building, but it
worked out extremely well.
And then, too, we had another strange event
happen. At about 65 or 66,
some students came to me and said, well, the
traditional areas of activity or specialization
within of aerospace engineering are
aerodynamics,
which has
to do with the flow of air about these mines,
structures, making them strong enough but light
enough that they'll fly, and propulsion, which
deals with engines and power plants, and that sort
of thing. But the fourth area is flight mechanics,
which deals with the entire vehicle. It deals with
stability and control and performance
maneuverability and that sort of thing. And so,
some students came to me and said, you know, they
were interested in more inflective things.
Wasn't there anything we could do to get active in
that area? Well, here we were with a beautiful
facility. The old Bryan Air Force Base parallel
7,500 foot runways. And at
that time, we had horses running over those
runways. To me, being one who has been hooked on
airplanes for many, many years, I think the
saddest thing that one can see is an abandoned
airplane, an airplane that there's a relic
that's just uncared for
sitting on the corner of an airport or in a hangar
and just falling.
And you think that at one time it must have been a
beautiful sight in flight. And there it sits,
rusting and deteriorating. The second saddest
thing I think it's an abandoned airport.
Well, you could imagine that all the times there
were great and wonderful things that happened in
the past. People learning to fly. Now it's just a
cow pasture,
or in that case, a horse pasture. And they had
hangers out there that were just unused. And so, I
thought, well, gosh, maybe we could do something
with that facility. Now, there was another
thought that entered my mind at that time, and that
was that we had gotten the wind tunnel, the big wind
tunnel, back in operation, and we were working
there. And it occurred to me that if we could have a
sweat lab, that that would give us a very powerful
combination. we could not only do wind tunnel
tests, but we could take the results of those tests
and flight test them. Put them actually on an
airplane, you see. And the number of
institutions, universities that had that
capability were very, very limited. Count them
easily on a finger and one hand. And so I thought, It
just might lead to something good. Well, here
again, thank God for Aggie students and their
unbelievable enthusiasm. And thank God for Key's
money. Because, again, I went to Harry Whitmore
and laid the idea before him. And I have to tell you,
dear,
I don't think I have ever gone to Harry Woodward and
said, I need this. And that's just unbelievable. I
mean, that's incredible.
But in any event, he said, yeah, let's pursue that.
And so he gave me a little bit of money with which I
could hire some students. And
so the first thing they did was to, and then Mr.
Benson went to that for us and got the animal
science people to move their damn fences off the
runways so we could have access to some of the
runways. And that was not easy to do. Excuse me?
Were the runways still in good shape? Oh, yeah.
Uh-huh. Yeah. They just had fences across them.
But as you know, the Ags run this institution, and I
guess always will, even though...
But it was not... It required the clout that Mr.
Benson had in order to get that airport made back
into an airport. Well, we got that done, and my
students had surveyed the runways, and some of the
older runways were not in very good shape, but TTI
was using them, so that was okay. But the two new
runways that had been built for jet use in the very
late 50s, I think, when the Air Force Base was still
active, they were in great shape. But we were, you
know, they looked at the landing lights and runway
lights, whether or not they could be used. We might
use them at night. The answer there was no. They'd
all be just in gasoline storage facilities, and
they would pretty much deteriorate. Things like
that. And we had, and Harry got us the hangar out
there that is currently the flight lab hangar.
And, of course, it looked like it was about to fall
down, and so we had to have some structural
reinforcement of that hangar and so forth. Well,
if you're going to have a flight test facility, it
helps to have an airplane. And so I had been a pretty
successful scrounger of surplus property. And so
here was where the Research Foundation came in,
and Mr. A.D. Rickett, who is currently the Vice
President of the Research Foundation, but at that
time he was property manager of the Research
Foundation, and among other things, handled all
the surplus property. Well, this got to be a joke,
and Rick and I are now very close friends, and we
still talk about those days, he used to get these
lists of surplus property. And
we would go through those lists, and I got some
stuff for the shock tube, and I got some things for
the wind tunnel, and it turned out there was
occasionally an airplane that would show up.
Well, most of the time they were large airplanes,
and not particularly well suited to to research
with.
And that triggers a whole lot of memories. But
also keep in mind, again, this was mid and late 60s.
And we were trying to, the government was trying to
help the Vietnamese. We had, we were tracking two
airplanes pretty closely. And within, of course,
a space of two weeks, these were surplus
airplanes. Within the course of two weeks, we lost
both of them because they had decided that they
were going to take anything that would fly and
pretty much give it to the Vietnamese. And so here
we were with a flight lab and some eager students
and no airplanes. Well, I had heard from Mr. Bruce,
who incidentally deserves an awful lot of credit
for all of this, because Joe, and he had the
beginnings of the research and instrument shop on
the way at that time. And, of course, he's, he's,
Joe Bruce is an absolute genius when it comes to the
electromechanical department. He is absolutely
a genius, and doesn't get the credit that he
deserves, I think, for what he has contributed to
TEAS
and to the College of Engineering. But I knew from
Joe that
Grumman Aircraft had given us, had given Texas A&M
the number one and number two rum and egg cats.
These were airplanes that were built to be crop
dusters. In other words, they were designed from
the ground up as crop dusters. They were not
converted to that use. And back in the early days
before I came here, as a matter of fact it was still
underway when I came here, in the plant sciences
department there was a crop dusting research
program. They had the was that I think it was the
number two aircraft that they were flying. They
had different kinds of spray apparatus and so
forth on
them. But the other airplane, the number one
airplane, was not flying. And so, well, if you're
going to have an airplane, you better take a look at
that thing. I went out, and again, I had talked with
Mr. Whitmore about this, and I said, you know, it
may be that we'll have to rebuild that just in order
to get something in the air again to, you know, how
the hell could you go to a potential sponsor and
propose research work if you don't even have an
airplane with which to do it? And so I'd I'll never
forget the day we went out there and
Mr. Bruce got his keys and we went over to a
warehouse there at the annex. And he opened this
door and there was this dark, dust-filled room
laden with junk. And there in the back of the room,
with wings off, no engine, was the fuselage of the
ANCAT. The wings
were stacked up against the wall. And I looked at my
students and there was sort of a reenactment of the
deal with the wind tunnel model. And I said, folks,
if we're going to have a flight lab,
that's going to be our first research aircraft.
Well, there was a giant cloud of dust And in about
four or five months, I flew that aircraft that had
been rebuilt. A new engine put in it. The hopper
where the material to be sprayed had been taken
out. And Mr. Bruce had put a second cockpit in
there. Of course, an open cockpit by plane. And we
had, I had acquired some surplus research
electronic gear, surplus electronic gear to put
in there. And we converted that old ag cat into a
researcher.
And here again, it was all done with tees money. And
then we acquired the PA-18 from the Border Patrol
out of Marfa. And this is a Piper Cub. It's a Super
Cub, so-called, with a 150-horse engine.
And so we started with those two airplanes. And so
we had our airport. We had the hangar. We had two
research airplanes. And we had also had, if you
visit the flight lab today, you'll see offices
built along one side and in the back there. None of
that was there. That was, again, all done with T's
money.
And that was the beginning of the flight lab. And
again, without tease, it just, it simply would not
have happened.
It simply wouldn't have happened. So... What year
was that? Do you remember? I'm sorry? Do you
remember the year? Oh, Lord, honey. Late 60s?
We never had an official dedication. I suppose we
should have.
I think the flight lab as I recall,
was pretty well in operation by 67. We had
been doing a few little things prior to that. As a
matter of fact, I owned an airplane at that time,
and we did a little research with it. But we got the
AGCAT going, I think, in the spring of 67. And the
PA-18 came along very, very shortly thereafter.
And so pretty much by the fall of 67, as I recall, we
were pretty well
in operation. Now, how did, in 72, became
associate dean of engineering and director of the
Center for Urban Programs. What was the Center for
Urban Programs? Well, it was a strange place for an
engineer to be, I'll tell you. In late 71, after I'd
come back from Maryland, and in that summer and
fall of 71, and really the spring of 72, That was the
period of time when I was trying to find Mr. Benson,
pursuing Mr. Benson's directive to seek out some
new research areas.
In the midst of all that,
well,
again, you have to understand the mood at the time.
We were deep in the midst of what I call the age of
relevance. Everything that you did had to be
relevant. You had to serve mankind in a very direct
way. Our students, incidentally, respected that
viewpoint. There was no joy of learning. There was
no desire to learn anything, just for the fun of
learning it. It had to be relevant to something. It
had to be directly applicable. And the
engineering students of that day, they wanted to
know just what they needed to know to be
successful. No more, no less, but just what they
needed. You still see some tinges of that today,
but it's much diminished than what it was. Well,
the same thing applied to research. And one heard
that during those days, you know, if we can put a man
on the moon, surely to God we can do blah, blah,
blah. And at that point, in that day and age,
the problems of the urban
areas had come to the fore. a lot of that came out of
the unrest of the late 60s and of course the cities
were the focus of that unrest and although the
unrest had its roots in other things people saw a
declining quality of life in the cities and of
course in recent years I guess we've seen
Demographically, we've seen the movement
of people out in the cities and in smaller towns and
rural areas and so on. But there was great concern
at that time for trying to help
the cities. And there was money, federal money,
available. The National Science Foundation at
that time had developed what they called the RAN
program, R-A-N-N. And that stood for Research
Applied to the Nation's Needs. And it was an
interesting
program. And one part of it focused on urban
problems. And that, you know, that was sort of
unheard of for the National Science Foundation,
whose province had always been far out of physics,
you know, atomic physics, nuclear physics, and
some of the far reaches of chemistry and biology
and so forth. And now to get involved in an applied
research program focused on the cities. Well,
they had some money. And, uh, but in any event, to
come back to Texas A&M, uh, uh, I was, uh, as I say, in
this, uh, activity that Mr. Benson had directed
before. Uh, still working on the harry bar up
front. We had started some stuff in the
advanced transportation area. And, uh, and the
productivity thing was just really beginning to,
uh, to take with the, And
Lord, I can't think of his name. The guy who was the
city manager of the city of Dallas for many years.
He was then, at that time, he was
an assistant city manager. He was an incredible
man. I can't remember his name.
And, of course, by that time, Mr. Rutter had passed
away, and Dr. Williams was president. And so this
gentleman, almost had his name there, but that's
about it. This gentleman from the city of Dallas, I
can't remember whether he came down or whether he
wrote a letter. It seems like he wrote a letter. to
Dr. Williams, saying that he thought that Texas
A&M ought to mount an effort to help the citizens of
the state of Texas. And so Dr. Williams then asked
Mr. Benson, and I'm sure the reason that he did that
was because of Tease. Because, you see, And this
is, again, something we haven't touched on, but
again, it's something I'm sure you've heard by
now. One of the great advantages that TEAS has is
its ability to hang on to some of the indirect cost
money that has that issue been explained to you.
And other engineering experiment stations,
incidentally, don't have. So it's an enormously
powerful tool because, of course, it is the source
of the money, coupled with the money that they get
from the state. It is the source of the money with
which to do all these great things that I've been
describing to you. And so TEAS has been called upon
by the university to start a lot of things. you
know, the cyclotron, the food protein center, the
computer system, all started from peas and it was
because they had money. They were the only damn
ones on the campus that did, pretty much. All the
ags happened when they spent it on ag things, you
see. But a different, different sack of snakes. I
mean, a lot of people will say, Texas Agricultural
Experiment Station, Texas Engineering
Experiment Station. Ah, about the same name. It
must be about the same. Wrong. It was different as
night and day. I wish to help Perry Atkinson could
understand that. And that's an editorial
comment, obviously. But the ag folks don't
understand it. And
so Dr. Williams then asked Mr. Benson to pursue
this initiative. in the urban area. And of course,
Mr. Benson at that time had this gift by the name of
Thomas that was supposed to be seeking out new
research things for T's to do, and so he called me
into his office and said, would you take a look at
this? And so that was the beginning of the Center
for Urban Programs. And so the first thing I did, of
course not knowing anything, about urban
problems which i guess later on we saw that as kind
of a blessing because i had no preconceived
notions about what could be done or what couldn't
be done but the first thing i did was to take some t's
money and jump in my airplane and take a little tour
around the state and talk with city officials and
sound them out on this whole thing. And generally
positive reaction. Some were very cautious. Some
gave us some advice that was absolutely
invaluable in the later functions of the Center
for Academic Programs. Again, I
could go to those people and say, I have some money
to spend. Well, I came back after that jaunt and
told Mr. Benson that I thought it was a viable
thing, that I thought we would be relatively well
received in the cities.
we had some hurdles to
surmount. And that I was relatively sure that with
a properly constructed program that we could draw
federal support.
And so Mr. Benson went back to Dr. Williams and told
him that he thought we had the makings of a the
program here and he thought an organization ought
to be established to pursue this and dr williams
said fine mr chairman whom do you want on your
committee so he named benson the chairman of the
oversight committee and so then mr benson called
together a group of five as i recall deans other
deans and But these, of course, were the deans of
colleges that we thought we would draw on from, you
know, to support that urban program. So
it included
liberal arts, and it seems like the ag folks were
there. Yeah, Dr. Kunkel was there, and
architecture, geosciences was there. And I
think, yeah, Frank Cuban, who was the dean of
education, was there. And so they formed a kind of
an oversight group. And so rather quickly then,
the other things that I had been pursuing for Mr.
Benson sort of went into the background. And so we
focused our efforts on these. In the 50s, 40s and
50s, there had been a lot of research done on
industrialization of cities and surveys and that
type of thing. Had this been going on, and did you
then pick these things up and take them on, or did
you start totally from scratch? No, dearly. Well,
keep in mind, we had at that point, we had the
Industrial Economics Research Division here run
by Jim Bradley. That was still doing those? Oh yes,
right. And as a matter of fact, it was absorbed into
this center when it was established in 78. But not
into the urban center? No. It functioned
separately and it dealt with economic
development. No, the focus of the Center for Urban
Programs was to help cities deliver services more
efficiently.
And to manage more efficiently. So we developed
old continuing education programs for city
managers and other subsystem managers. For
example, it would be of no surprise to you if I told
you that we mounted a continuing education
program for airport managers, which was quite
successful for its brief tenure. We embarked on a
management assistance program, and,
well, we had a lot of things underway. And here
again, at this point, I have to throw some more
accolades at this pension. When you start a
program from scratch like that, Here again,
without any proven expertise to work in the area,
you have to have money to develop some
credibility.
And of course, I knew that I was to bring money as
fast as I could. I mean, we didn't want to be on the
dole forever.
be using, be dependent on Pease money, uh, thought
infinitely. And, uh, so I well remember we were,
uh, see that began in 72, I guess this, uh, this
incident occurred like in 74 or 5. We had had one or
two small grants, uh, to
do urban work, but I was plainly concerned that
this thing wasn't developing as fast as I thought
it should. And so I guess on one day when I was a bit
down, I went to see Mr. Batson and I said, Skipper,
I'm just not sure what this thing is for.
He
listened to my lament and he said, Dick, you are too
worried about bringing money home. He said, you
worry about building a quality program. And if you
do that, the money will come. Let me worry about the
money. you just concentrate on
building a quality building. Well, darling,
that's the way it ought to
be done. Again, to be somewhat critical of our
current tease, leadership
does not understand that the way Mr. Benson
understood it. So what I'm saying to you is that the
power, the strength, The sort of grudging respect
that TEAS currently enjoys in the Texas A&M
community, and I think in other parts of the state
and the nation, is due largely to the
preferences of you about how to build quality
programs. You don't build a quality program by
throwing money at it for a year.
His view was that if I had a self-supporting
program within five years, that would be great.
And if it took eight years, then it just took eight
years. That's all. And you just don't find that
kind of attitude or the ability to do that in other
areas or in other institutions. And so in any
event, interestingly, shortly after that, Very
sure, within six months of that conversation I had
with Mr. Benson, things started to break for us.
And again, it was because we'd had teased money to
go out and do a few things, and I could go to the RAND
program people in NSF, and to the HUD people, it was
Housing and Urban Development at that time, and
tell them what we had done. We had a trash record. I
had faculty identified that had expertise, you
see. We had gone out and and worked with a few of the
cities, and I'd say, yeah, I know Marvin Townsend,
the city manager at Fox, Christine, and other
guys, you know, and police chiefs, and things like
that. And so, and again, that was all because of T's
money. And coupled with Mr. Benson's
tremendously important... understanding of
what it takes to promote and develop these things.
And so within six months after that conversation,
I think we had a backlog of something like $750,000
worth of research. We had started, we had gotten
into the Urban Observatory Program,